FTX Is On Fire, But Where Is Its “Break The Glass” Plan?

New revelations show that many things went wrong in the corporate governance, business culture and decision-making processes at FTX—the second largest centralized crypto exchange.

In the aftermath of the implosion of FTX, many are sure to look for accountability, shining spotlights on the various laws that apply to (or should have applied to) FTX’s business. For example, the SEC was trying to determine if a company like FTX needs to register as a securities exchange, Although the SEC was criticized for taking its time in announcing/enforcing the rules, the lack of a clear, consistent approach enabled market participants to enjoy more regulatory arbitrage. Likewise, since federal and state regulators were slow to enforce rules ranging from accounting standards to compliance requirements, it now appears that at least at FTX many of these rules were clearly not followed. Moreover, based on available data so far, it also appears that FTX’s executives breached their fiduciary duties and entered into many transactions that were characterized by conflicts of interest. The biggest thing that could have, and should have been done is use the framework of the Dodd-Frank Act, which I will explain in more detail below.

Before discussing additional regulations, let’s first address how we got here. Many argue that sophisticated investors are enough of a check on companies like FTX. In the case of FTX, they wonder how the “smart money” – the sophisticated investors involved that plowed $1.9 billion into FTX since 2019, according to PitchBook – was so off in its understanding of what was going on. But VC and investors likely contributed to FTX’s lack of accountability, and facilitated problems in FTX’s corporate governance, its decision-making processes, and its risk management procedures. As Professor Elizabeth Pollman from the University of Pennsylvania Law School describes it, “the explosive growth of private markets has left huge portions of U.S. capital markets with relatively light securities fraud scrutiny and enforcement. Some of the largest private companies by valuation grow in an environment of extreme information asymmetry and with the pressure, opportunity, and rationalizing culture that can foster misconduct and deception.” So basically, private companies (can and sometimes do) lie, and crypto-related businesses are no different. In FTX’s case – as detailed by Matt Levine – it now appears that the two largest asset balances “were $5.9 billion of FTT ($553 million at post-crash prices last Thursday) and $5.4 billion of SRM ($2.2 billion post-crash). Something like two-thirds of the money that FTX owed to customers was backed by its own tokens that it had made up.” In other words, as has been the subject of many media stories in recent months, the toxic VC-culture incentivizes investors to pump money into startups without doing proper due diligence. These investments, which are often based on FOMO, have a significant impact in a signaling economy – when the biggest, most sophisticated investors indicate to the rest of the world that they believe their investments are solid, others that are less sophisticated follow. VC and sophisticated investors make money, while the less sophisticated investors, and consumers get hurt.

In light of these issues, regulators could have—and should have—turned to the regulatory framework provided by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), which Congress enacted in 2010. The Dodd Frank Act, much like prior laws passed as a response to regulatory crises, aimed to address systemic risk in the financial system and to institute other related reforms. It includes various mechanisms and rules that aim to help financial institutions reduce and better manage risks – that have arguably been working – including a requirement for certain entities to create contingency “break the glass” plans, also known as “living wills,” which those entities could use in case they fail, as such plans would already be available. This concept is not surprising. Generally speaking, it is always a good idea for those that are in the business of risk-taking to be prepared to handle failures.

In the financial industry, contingency plans could save entities that find themselves in an extremely sudden, tight situation – like FTX– from a “free-fall” bankruptcy filing. This type of filing, which commences without any significant planning or preparations of first-day motions, was what FTX ended up doing last Friday, and is far from a desired situation because the debtor and all stakeholders have no clue how things will unfold. To paraphrase Tolstoy’s first sentence in Anna Karenina: “Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way” – happy companies are all alike, but every failing company is failing in its own way. Therefore, companies’ advance planning based on their features, lines of operations and businesses is key, and can make a failing company less unhappy in the event of a crisis. For instance, following the 2008 financial crisis, reports showed that a plan in advance in the Lehman Brothers’ case could have saved the estate at least $75 million.

With these insights in mind, through the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress created the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), a collaborative body chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury, which brings together the expertise of federal financial regulators, state regulators, and even an independent insurance expert. The FSOC has important authorities to constrain excessive risk in the financial system, such as the authority to designate nonbank financial entities for tough supervision to help minimize the risk of such entities from threatening the stability of the financial system. Among its responsibilities, under Section 113 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the FSOC is authorized to determine that a nonbank financial company’s material financial distress—or the nature, scope, size, scale, concentration, interconnectedness, or mix of its activities—could pose a threat to U.S. financial stability, and subject that company to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve and enhanced prudential standards. And, as part of the Act’s supervision regime, designated companies should prepare living wills for their “orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure.” The idea behind the living wills concept is that planning in advance how a financial entity could be resolved in a rapid, orderly way in the event of a failure, could help save a lot of time, money and trouble. After all, these living wills, which in essence are a type of a disclosure requirement, also mandate that each designated company internally manage and better monitor its business and financial risks, as well as report periodically on its risk exposure to others.

Now imagine that FTX was designated by the FSOC as an entity that is required to prepare and submit a living will – what a difference such a designation would have made for FTX’s flawed corporate governance, risk management processes and general operation! Professor Ben Edwards from the William S. Boyd School of Law agrees that "contingency planning for adverse events would have brought some sunlight to FTX early instead of allowing problems to fester in the shadows.”

First, requiring large and complex financial entities, such as the second largest centralized crypto exchange, to undertake the process of devising and sharing, in advance, a well-conceived and well-maintained contingency plan would have dramatically lessened the probability that it would ever go under. For starters, FTX would have probably had to replace its three people hardly-worthy-to-be-called board of directors, especially given their lack of experience, and disclose or simply avoid some of the boards’ conflicts of interest-based transactions.

Second, mandating that an entity such as FTX devise a living will would no doubt have resulted in the company becoming a more simplified financial institution, which would have been much easier for regulators to understand, and if ever in bankruptcy, for the court to deal with. After all, when forcing a company like FTX to plan how to best reorganize, or if needed liquidate itself — not only during a crisis — would have forced it to focus efforts on the areas where its business strategies fall short of best practice. For example, the management would have needed to review and revise FTX’s business structure and explain its multiple entities – are these the result of mergers? Were they created for tax purposes? Are they an attempt to maneuver around regulations? In FTX’s case the bankruptcy filing revealed 134 affiliated corporate entities that are now subject to the bankruptcy proceedings. The filing also included FTX US, a separate entity that was supposed to be insulated from FTX international, and seemed to have stopped processing its customers’ withdrawals after the bankruptcy filing. Hypothetically, by being forced by regulators to target in a living will the contractual, legal, and business relationships between a designated entity’s various affiliated entities, management of entities such as FTX could improve their efficiency and business operations. Thus, going through the living wills process could result in meaningful benefits and better prudential supervision in booming times, and, of course, in times of crisis.

Third, preparing living wills forces entities to evaluate restructuring solutions, including through the bankruptcy court, rather than learn about such solutions and options for the first time in real time. Currently, FTX is learning that the bankruptcy system still hasn’t quite figured out crypto, that the bankruptcy courts had made limited progress reorganizing other crypto firms before FTX filed for chapter 11, and that bankruptcies, in general, can be years-long proceedings.

Lastly, some industry experts believe that the living wills concept is relatively advantageous to a high-impact and high-cost regulatory solution that may otherwise ensue living wills can help create a better financial system. The type of information that designated entities should have readily accessible for their living will is the same type of information that bankruptcy practitioners should ideally have prior to commencing proceedings under the Bankruptcy Code. And the hope is that while collecting such information and organizing it, each entity should verify that it uses proper corporate governance procedures and that it maintains all of its books and records in good order, including the separateness of all of its individual legal entities' books, records, assets, bank accounts, and liabilities. This entails – even for crypto companies – that each entity sets, maintains, or keeps clear records in its management information system of all intercompany debt; procedures regarding funds transfer; procedures for segregating trust funds such as deposits or taxes from operating funds; procedures to allow for ready-access of financial information regarding cash and securities positions; a list of the main contracts and unexpired leases to which the entity is a party so that the SIFI will be able to determine quickly, if need be, whether or not such contracts should be rejected; data concerning the entity’s membership in payments; its clearing and settlement facilities and infrastructures; records regarding the segregation of client assets – something that was clearly at the heart of the problem in FTX case – and the procedures by which such assets could be reassigned to third parties; and data regarding the entity’s deposit base.

As for the information that companies should include in their living wills, whenever relevant and applicable, data concerning designated entities’ must cover (i) unpledged collateral; (ii) funding and lines of credit; (iii) cash flows and earnings; (iv) capital; (v) a summary of total assets and total liabilities; (vi) an approximation of the amount of secured debt and other liabilities; and (vii) the approximate number of holders of each of the categories of debt and securities—organized based on parameters such as legal entity, counterparty, the business line, or legal regime. Unbelievable as it may sound, FTX basically has done very little in terms of meeting these standards. It, famously now, had a spreadsheet that listed FTX’s assets and liabilities with entries’ descriptions such as $8bn in a “hidden, poorly internally labled ‘fiat@’ account,” and included warnings about how figures “are rough values, and could be slightly off; there is also obviously a chance of typos etc. They also change a bit over time as trades happen.” Similarly, the spreadsheet stated that the exchange held only $900mn in easily sellable assets against $9bn of liabilities the day before it filed for bankruptcy. Referring to these issues, in an interview conducted yesterday, Sam Bankman-Fried said that “he didn’t realize the extent of the problem because of “messy accounting.”

Make no mistake. Designating FTX and the like, and getting such companies to do contingency planning cannot and would not solve all the accountability, governance, management, and other problems that made FTX grow and collapse so fast and so dramatically. Living wills should not and cannot replace basic corporate governance norms and rules. Academics such as Hillary Allen from American University's Washington College of Law have long advocated that regulation is clearly needed in the crypto industry, concerning issues ranging from crypto asset-related rules to financial stability risks and consumer / investor protection, local and international friction points, and in connection with CBDCs and stablecoins’ operations. Likewise, experience teaches us that no living will would ever be capable of fully neutralizing systemic risk. However, at the same time, preparing and planning for potential events of failure would likely improve complex financial entities’ possible response, in case such events were to happen, improve their efficiency and enable experienced professionals to offer useful feedback.

So where do we go from here? Unclear. Next month, the U.S. House Financial Services Committee plans to hold a hearing to investigate FTX’s collapse. In the meantime, in its 2022 Financial Stability Oversight Council, Report on Digital Asset Financial Stability Risks and Regulation, the FSOC has already stated that the “large crypto-assets platforms pose significant financial stability risks inside the crypto-asset ecosystem through their numerous interconnections and risk management profiles.” But the FSOC report also states that “under the Dodd Frank Act, the FSOC has specific authority to promote those goals that could be applied to crypto-asset activities or entities. This authority includes a designation of non-bank financial companies, financial market utilities, and payment, clearing or settlement activities. Designation would subject these entities or activities to additional supervision and regulation intended to address the financial stability vulnerabilities they present. To date, the FSOC has not used its designation authorities for crypto-assets activities or entities." The report explains this decision by stressing that while crypto-asset activities could pose a risk to the financial system if they continued to grow, as of Fall 2022, the FSOC still believes that the crypto-eco system has yet to become too-interconnected with traditional finance, or large enough to create risks that merit its involvement.

However, even if not fully interconnected with traditional finance, the crypto-industry is probably already so large that it merits more supervision – a recent Forbes article reveals that 16 crypto and DeFi exchanges have a value of over $60 billion. And following FTX’s collapse, the crypto contagion continues to spread with more crypto platforms halting withdrawals, experiencing challenges, and considering filing for bankruptcy. Prior to the 2008 crisis, the American financial regulatory framework focused narrowly on individual institutions and markets, and that enabled supervisory gaps to grow and regulatory inconsistencies to emerge. No regulators had responsibility for monitoring and addressing overall risks to financial stability, which meant that different types of financial firms operating across multiple markets led to important parts of the financial system becoming unregulated. The FSOC was meant to solve this exact problem. It is a shame, therefore, that the FSOC did not designate massive centralized crypto exchanges such as FTX as entities that need more supervision. Financial regulators are now making it clear that more and stricter regulation is needed in crypto and DeFi markets. In that context, going forward, at a minimum, it seems obvious that financial regulators should issue guidance on how significant players in those markets should conduct themselves in terms of corporate governance, accounting and risk management that go beyond AML and KYC, in order to better protect customers, but also better prepare for potential failures.