Activision Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick Set To Leave In December—Here’s What To Know About His Controversies

Topline
Microsoft's acquisition of video game giant Activision Blizzard — which closed Friday after a protracted approval process — will result in Activision's CEO Bobby Kotick stepping down in December after a 32-year-tenure marked in recent years by scandals, including allegations of a toxic workplace, which Kotick and Activision have denied. Editor’s Note: This story has been updated to incorporate the findings of Activision’s independent investigations.

Key Facts
Kotick will depart his role in December after assisting with Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision, a $68.7 billion deal that completed Friday, nearly two years after it was first announced.

Activision and Kotick have been embroiled in controversy since the state of California sued Activision in July 2021, alleging a culture of “constant sexual harassment” that included unwanted comments and physical touching of female employees by male employees, and the suit claimed top executives were aware of or involved with the workplace issues.

Activision called the suit’s claims “distorted” and “false” — and the suit sparked multiple outside investigations by the company.

Activision tapped former Equal Employment Opportunity Commission chair Gilbert Casellas to investigate, while the company’s board hired law firm Skadden Arps, and both investigations found there was no widespread harassment at the company.

A Wall Street Journal report from November, 2021, cited memos, emails and other documents allegedly demonstrating Kotick was aware of allegations made in many parts of the company and in some cases did not inform the company’s board of directors, or else minimized the severity of allegations to the board — though Skadden Arps’ investigation found Kotick did take action on issues brought to his attention.

Activision said in 2021 that the Wall Street Journal report presented a “misleading view of Activision Blizzard and our CEO,” and Kotick apologized in 2021 for employees not feeling comfortable reporting concerns.

Activision has also paid several multimillion dollar settlements, including $18 million to the Equal Employment and Opportunity Commission in 2022 to settle a federal sexual harassment lawsuit, and $35 million to the Securities and Exchange Commission in February to settle charges it violated an SEC whistleblower protection rule and failing to maintain adequate disclosure protocols.

Kotick addressed workplace complaints in a 2023 Variety interview, denying Activision has ever had a systemic problem with harassment, blaming the allegations on a “very aggressive labor movement working hard to try and destabilize the company.”

Contra
Activision has repeatedly denied allegations the company has a systemic culture of harassment. Casellas’ investigation concluded that there was “no widespread harassment, pattern or practice of harassment, or systemic harassment at Activision Blizzard or at any of its business units” between late 2016 and 2021. The Casellas report noted there were “incidents of individual workplace misconduct,” but stated this happens with “most large employers.” The investigation commissioned by the board and led by law firm Skadden Arps also analyzed harassment claims received between late 2016 and 2021, and concluded there was no evidence of widespread harassment. Activision has also pointed out the California lawsuit is still ongoing and no rulings have yet been made supporting the allegations. Activision also says it has made several workplace reforms, including hiring a diversity, equity and inclusion officer and releasing an annual transparency report. This year’s report, released in May, found 29 substantiated instances of workplace harassment at Activision in 2022, which the company says it addressed through corrective measures.

Chief Critics
Kotick and Activision have faced criticism from employees, who have in certain instances demanded Kotick’s resignation. Employees first staged a walkout to protest the company’s workplace culture and sexual harassment allegations in July 2021, one week after the company was sued by California. After the November 2021 Wall Street Journal report, more than 100 employees staged another walkout demanding Kotick be replaced as CEO. Employees also started a petition in November, 2021, calling for Kotick’s resignation, garnering more than 1,800 signatures. The petition stated signatories “no longer have confidence in the leadership of Bobby Kotick as the CEO of Activision Blizzard” because of the reports about his “behaviors and practices in the running of our companies.” Activision shareholders also wrote a letter asking Kotick to resign following the Wall Street Journal story, citing how he was reportedly “aware of many incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, and gender discrimination.”

Surprising Fact
Kotick stands to make a big profit from Microsoft’s Activision acquisition. He is reportedly expected to receive about $15 million once he departs the company, without considering the millions of shares he holds in Activision Blizzard.

Key Background
Among some of the allegations made about Activision’s workplace in the California lawsuit were that male employees would arrive to work hungover and have “cube crawls,” getting drunk in the workplace. The suit alleged male employees would also discuss their sexual encounters openly in the workplace and make jokes about rape, and would subject women to unwanted sexual comments and touching. A hotel suite used by World of Warcraft developer Alex Afrasiabi at BlizzCon 2013 was referred to as the “Cosby suite,” reportedly because the suite was filled with alcohol and employees would pose with a portrait of Bill Cosby, who has been publicly accused of sexual assault by more than 60 women. The suit also alleged Afrasiabi would flirt with and touch women at company events. Following the lawsuit, numerous employees came forward with their own experiences, including several who corroborated the “Cosby suite” allegations. Another employee alleged they were demoted for reporting sexual harassment and the parents of former employee Kerri Moynihan sued Activision in March 2022, alleging the workplace conditions were a “significant factor” that contributed to their daughter’s death by suicide. At the time, Activision stated it would “address the complaint through the legal process as appropriate” and declined to comment further out of respect for Moynihan’s family. Moynihan’s parents dropped the lawsuit in June 2022 but did not publicly state why.

Tangent
Activision filed a lawsuit in December 2022 against California’s Civil Rights Department, alleging misconduct by the agency that sued Activision in July 2021 alleging a culture of sexual harassment. Among other claims, Activision accused the CRD of making “knowingly false assertions” against Activision and leaking information to the media through off-the-record correspondences, which Activision claims violated an internal CRD policy not to talk to the media about ongoing affairs. In response, the CRD told Forbes it would “continue to vigorously pursue our proactive litigation in this matter on behalf of the people of our state.”