McDonald’s CEO Eats Burger, Gets Roasted By Burger King In Viral Post

What makes a video clip go viral on social media? For those who flip through reels constantly, you know there is a (excuse the pun) golden combination. Recently, a clip known as “McDonald’s CEO eats burger” racked up 145,000 shares in a day for the Golden Arches exec. The combination of followers poking fun at the clip with a touch of sarcasm, calling out any form of inauthenticity or lack of genuineness, combined with a perceived notion of corporate obliviousness is often all it takes.

McDonald’s released the Big Arch double-burger yesterday in the U.S. after some trials in other countries, and McDonald’s CEO Chris Kempczinski (who goes by Chris K) decided to try it out, posting on his personal Instagram. I’ll explain why I think the resulting jabs are a bit unfair in a moment, but first I’ll explain why companies (and CEOs) are posting clips like this more and more.

We used to call this “behind the scenes” many years ago, but social media has flipped that all around. Anyone can record a clip on their phone for any reason, so we know if companies post a glossy corporate video instead, it’s because they want to impress us. Which is all to say that Chris K had the right idea, but the execution fell a bit flat. He takes a small bite and calls the Big Arch a “product” instead of a burger. Mostly, it all felt inauthentic. You can easily imagine why the social media team asked him to do the clip for the reasons I mentioned above.

I have to commend him for at least trying to connect with followers in a more authentic way. You see him sitting in an office, unpacking the burger, and taking a bite. Honestly, he seems like a nice guy. It’s obviously staged and there’s a camera crew and perfect lighting, but it really is the CEO sampling the burger. (I emailed McDonald’s reps for comment but have not heard back yet.)

Reactions to the McDonald’s CEO Eats Burger clip
Reactions on social media came fast and furious. One suggested that Chris K seems more like a kale salad type of person. “I’ll take two units, please,” said another, referencing the CEO’s “product” word choice. Others called him out for looking “scared” to sample the burger, which might be an exaggeration.

Predictably, both Burger King and Wendy’s chimed in with their own dose of sarcasm, commenting on the Instagram video. BK noted that “they couldn’t finish the burger, either.” Wendy’s made a sly remark about there being "a lot to unpack," which could be interpreted in many ways. (Most likely, Wendy’s was referring to the dozens of posts calling out the CEO for a lack of enthusiasm.)

Tom Curtis, Burger King’s President in the U.S., even posted his own video chomping away at the Whopper, a true sign that Chris K’s viral clip struck a nerve and is getting eyeballs. I’m guessing Chris K didn’t intend for this all to backfire, and I’m not surprised he has already posted another video on his feed.

Why people are mocking McDonald’s CEO Eats Burger
I do think the criticism is a bit unfair, though.

For one thing, when someone is creating a video like this with good lighting and sound, there’s a tendency to perform but that’s not always a bad thing. In the video, he looks like an actor taking a bite out of a burger. I’m not defending the weirdness of it all, and most of the comments are valid, but it seems like social media users tend to pounce on things like this. His video is not that egregious.

And then there’s this: I tried the burger. It’s not bad at all, and shows that McDonald’s is trying to improve their food offerings. I had to scoff at the price (it’s over $9 in my area, which is a lot for fast food) and I don’t think Red Robin or Five Guys should worry too much, but this is not a bad attempt.

When it comes to authenticity, I guess my lingering question about all of the “McDonald’s CEO Eats Burger” controversy is this: Why do we get so worked up? Maybe the video is staged and maybe he’s not a major burger lover. I’m judging the whole episode based on the actual burger, which to me is an improvement.